Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on government schemes.
Let's unpack the mystery of
this concept without needing a
PhD or a panic attack concept.
Explanation.
So what are these government schemes
everyone keeps talking about?
Think of them as initiatives
or master plans launched by our
central or state governments.
Their goal is to tackle specific social,
economic, or environmental issues.
Basically, they exist to improve
our welfare, boost the economy,
provide essential services, and
hit various development targets.
These schemes can offer anything from
financial help and subsidies to skill
development and new infrastructure.
All designed to benefit
certain people or sectors.
Understanding them is not
just for passing an exam.
It's crucial for any citizen to know
their rights and for professionals
to guide people correctly.
Real world relevance.
Why should care first?
The economic impact?
These schemes drive financial inclusion
and push credit to important sectors,
which affects the entire economy.
Second, as a professional in a public
facing role, you will definitely meet
beneficiaries of these schemes, so it's
your public service duty to be informed.
Third for customer service.
Understanding a scheme's objective
is absolutely essential for
helping people effectively.
And finally, compliance.
Knowing the details ensures you
guide beneficiaries properly
and stick to all the rules.
Breakdown of question types.
Now for your exam, the question
setters have a favorite pattern.
About 35% of questions will ask about
the scheme, objective or purpose.
What is the main goal?
Around 25% of questions will be
about the launch date or year.
When did it start?
Then about 20% focus on
the target beneficiaries.
Who is this scheme for?
A smaller chunk, about 10% will test
you on key features or components,
and the last 10% is split between
asking for the responsible ministry
or department and any associated
terminology, formulas and tricks.
While there's no magic formula, we do have
some DEI jugar for remembering all this.
First, use acronyms and mnemonics.
Create catchy phrases for scheme names.
Second, try categorization group
schemes by their ministry sector like
agriculture or health, or by their
objective like financial inclusion.
Third timeline association link a
scheme's launch to a major national
event to build a mental map.
Fourth use keyword
association for each scheme.
Just remember two or three unique
keywords that trigger its purpose, and
of course, the old Faithful Flashcards
scheme on one side, details on the other.
Simple and effective.
Methods of solving.
So how do we solve these questions?
Think like a detective.
First, identify the core purpose.
Always ask yourself, why
was this scheme launched?
What problem is it solving?
Second, pinpoint the target audience.
Who is it for?
Is it for farmers, women,
or small businesses?
Third note the launch details.
Memorize the year and
the ministry responsible.
Fourth list its key features.
What does the scheme actually do?
What are its main benefits?
Fifth, understand the implementation.
How does it work?
Is it through direct benefit
transfer or subsidies?
And finally, connect to current events.
Relating schemes to recent news
makes them much easier to remember.
Shortcuts and smart techniques.
Want the express lane
to mastering this topic.
Here are some smart techniques.
Focus on high impact schemes.
Prioritize the big ones that are always
in the news or have massive budgets.
Next, use comparative analysis.
When two schemes sound similar,
compare them side by side to
see what makes them different.
This avoids a lot of confusion.
Remember, regular revision is key.
These schemes change.
So spaced repetition is your
best friend, no cramming, always
have a what's new approach.
Pay attention to any recent updates
or new phases of existing schemes
and in multiple choice questions.
Use the elimination strategy.
Even if you aren't sure of the
right answer, you can often
eliminate the obviously wrong ones.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
All right, let's talk
about the common traps.
A classic mistake is confusing.
Scheme names, many acronyms
sound the same, so be careful.
Another is getting incorrect.
Launch dates wrong.
The ear is usually enough, but know
the exact date for major schemes.
People also misidentify beneficiaries.
Assuming a scheme is for everyone,
when it's for a specific group.
And please avoid mixing up ministries.
Attributing a scheme to the wrong
department is a very common error.
Also be aware of outdated information.
Schemes get updated, so make
sure your sources are current.
Lastly, don't just focus on the name.
Overlooking key features means
you miss the crucial details.
WH framework summary.
To wrap it all up neatly,
let's use the WH framework.
What are these schemes?
They are government initiatives for
societal and economic challenges.
Why do they exist to improve
welfare, promote growth, and
achieve development goals?
When are they launched at different
times, responding to specific needs?
Where are they implemented across India?
Sometimes in targeted regions.
Who do they benefit?
All citizens, but often specific
demographic groups or sectors.
And how do they work through
financial aid, subsidies,
services, or new regulations.
Fully worked out examples.
Let's practice with an example.
Example.
One question.
The Phan Manna.
P-M-J-D-Y was launched with the
primary objective of A providing
free housing to all rural families.
B, promoting financial intrusion by
ensuring access to financial services.
C, offering subsidized food grains
to below poverty line families.
D, establishing new educational
institutions across the country understand
the question before moving to explanation.
Step one is to analyze the question, which
asks for the main objective of P-M-J-D-Y.
Step two, recall its purpose.
P-M-J-D-Y is India's massive
financial inclusion program.
Its whole point is to give
everyone access to a bank account.
Step three, evaluate the options.
Housing is pr, food Grains is
the public distribution system.
Education has its own schemes,
so step four is clear.
Option B perfectly matches
the objective of P-M-J-D-Y.
Example two question.
Which of the following government
schemes is specifically aimed at
providing collateral free loans
to micro and small enterprises?
A PR man, P-J-J-B-Y-B.
AL Pension.
Yona.
A PYC.
PR Man
understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step one, the question wants
the scheme for collateral free
loans for small businesses.
Step two, let's recall
what these schemes do.
P-M-J-J-B-Y is life insurance.
A PY is a pension scheme.
PMMY gives loans up to 10, lacks to
micro enterprises, and a key feature
is that they are collateral free
and P-M-S-P-Y is accident insurance.
Step three.
Evaluating these only mudra,
Yona fits the description.
So for step four, we select
the correct option, which is
c. Example three question.
The Ian Clean India mission was launched
with the primary goal of A, promoting
digital literacy in rural areas.
B, achieving universal sanitation
coverage, and open defecation free status.
C, providing financial assistance
to small farmers, D developing
smart cities across the country.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step one.
We need the primary goal of SW Ian.
Step two, recall the purpose.
This was the huge nationwide
campaign to clean up India, and most
importantly, eliminate open defecation.
Step three, let's look at the options.
Digital literacy, farmer assistance, and
smart cities are all different missions.
Option B about sanitation coverage
and making India open defecation free.
Core mission of SW Barat, step four.
Therefore, option B is our correct answer.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.